host - nontraditional devices that are hooked up to the Internet; hosts = end systems.

end system - a host.

communication links - networks that connect end systems together. things like, copper wires and optical fibers.

packet switches - takes a packet coming in on an incoming communication link and fowards it on an outgoing communication link. 

transmission rate - the rate at which data is transmitted. measured in bits/second.

packet - the packaging of info from the segmentation of data and addition of header bytes when on end system wants to send data to another.

router - type of packet switch. used in the network core. 

link-layer switch - type of packet switch. used in access networks.

route and path - the sequence of communication links and packet switches traversed by a packet from the sending end system to the 
receiving end system.

ISP - where end systems access the internet through. provides network access to end systems.

protocol - rules that control the sending and receiving of info on the internet

TCP - a set of rules that governs the delivery of data over the Internet or other network that uses the Internet Protocol, 
and sets up a connection between the sending and receiving computers.

IP - a protocol that specifies the format of the packets that are sent and received among routers and end systems.

internet standards - agreements on what each and every protocol does.
 
RFC - requests for comments. Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) standards documents. define protocols.

distributed applications - apps that involve multiple end systems that exchange data with each other. 

API - application programming interface. the interface between the application layer and the transport layer within a host.

network protocols - similar to a human protocol (rules of driving), except that the entities exchanging messages and taking actions
are hardware or software components of some device.

network edge - covers everything that happens in the end systems. where a transport protocol moves messages from application processes to.

clients - hosts that tend to be desktop and mobile PCs.

servers - hosts that tend to be more powerful machines that store and distribute Web pages, stream video, and relay e-mail.

access networks - the network that physically connects an end system to the first router (also known as
the “edge router”) on a path from the end system to any other distant end system.

DSL - Internet access from a local telephone company (telco) that provides its wired local phone access.

cable internet access - makes use of the cable television company’s existing cable television infrastructure to provide internet.

HFC - hybrid fiber coax.  fiber and coaxial cables combined. fiber optics connect the cable head to neighborhoods and coaxial cables
are used to reach houses. 

FTTH -  fiber to the home. an up-and-coming technology that provides even higher speeds.

Ethernet - twisted-pair copper wire. way of connecting computers together in a local area network or LAN. most prevalent access technology
in corporate, university, and home networks. 

WiFi - Wireless LAN access based on IEEE 802.11 technology. uses radio waves to provide wireless high-speed Internet and network 
connections.

physical medium - twisted-pair copper wire, coaxial cable, multimode fiber-optic cable, terrestrial radio spectrum, and satellite radio
spectrum. Transmission medium, a medium used in the propagation of energy waves.

guided media - type of physical media. the waves are guided along a solid medium, such as a fiber-optic cable, a twisted-pair copper
wire, or a coaxial cable.

unguided media - type of physical media.  the waves propagate in the atmosphere and in outer
space, such as in a wireless LAN or a digital satellite channel.

UTP - Unshielded twisted pair. commonly used for computer networks within a building, that is, for LANs.

coaxial cable - used to reach individual houses and apartments. consists of two concentric copper conductors. the special insulation
and shielding makes it achieve high data transmission rates.  

shared medium - a number of end systems can be connected.

fiber optics - a thin, flexible medium that conducts pulses of light, with each pulse representing a
bit. 

terrestrial radio - Any radio signal that travels along the land, is broadcast from a land based station and is received by land based
receivers. 

satellite radio - a radio service in which the signals are transmitted or retransmitted by a communications satellite.

geostationary satellite - satellites that permanently remain above the same spot on Earth

LEO satellite - placed much closer to Earth and do not remain permanently above one spot on Earth.

messages - info exchanged between end systems. can contain data or perform a control function.

store-and-forward - the packet switch must receive the entire packet before it can begin to transmit the first bit of the packet onto the 
outbound link.

output buffer/output queue - stores packets that the router is about to send.

queuing delays - depend on the level of congestion in the network. the sum of the delays encountered by a packet between the time of 
insertion into the network and the time of delivery to the address.

packet loss - an arriving packet may find that the buffer is completely full with other packets waiting for transmission so either the 
arriving packet or one of the already-queued packets will be dropped.

forwarding table - maps destination addresses (or portions of the destination addresses) to that router’s outbound links.

circuit switching - the resources needed along a path (buffers, link transmission rate) to provide for communication between the end 
systems are reserved for the duration of the communication session between the end systems. 

packet switching - resources are not reserved; a session’s messages use the resources on demand and, as a consequence, may have to wait 
(that is, queue) for access to a communication link.

	As a simple analogy, consider two restaurants, one that
	requires reservations and another that neither requires reservations nor accepts them. For the
	restaurant that requires reservations, we have to go through the hassle of calling before we leave home.
	But when we arrive at the restaurant we can, in principle, immediately be seated and order our meal.
	For the restaurant that does not require reservations, we don’t need to bother to reserve a table. But
	when we arrive at the restaurant, we may have to wait for a table before we can be seated.

circuit - connection between the sender and the receiver. 

end-to-end connection - established by a network when two hosts want to communicate.

FDM - frequency-division multiplexing. the frequency spectrum of a link is divided up among the connections
established across the link. Specifically, the link dedicates a frequency band to each connection for the
duration of the connection.

TDM - time-division multiplexing. time is divided into frames of fixed duration, and each frame is divided into a fixed
number of time slots. When the network establishes a connection across a link, the network dedicates
one time slot in every frame to this connection. 

bandwidth - a range of frequencies within a given band, in particular that used for transmitting a signal.

silent periods - when dedicated circuits are idle during circuit switching.

customer - the access ISP.

provider - global transit ISP.

regional ISP - where the access ISPs in the region connect.

tier-1 ISP - where each regional ISP connects to.

PoP for ISP - a group of one or more routers (at the same location) in the provider’s network where customer
ISPs can connect into the provider ISP.

multi-homed ISP - to connect to two or more provider ISPs.

peer - two or more computers that can directly connect their networks together so that all the traffic between them passes over the
direct connection rather than through upstream intermediaries.

IXP - Internet Exchange Point (IXP), which is a meeting point where multiple ISPs can peer together.

content provider networks - services like google.

nodal processing delay - The time required to examine the packet’s header and determine where to direct the packet.

queuing delay - depends on the number of earlier-arriving packets that are queued and waiting for transmission onto the link.

transmission delay - L/R. This is the amount of time required to push (that is, transmit) all of the packet’s bits into the link.

propagation delay - The time required to propagate from the beginning of the link to the router.

total nodal delay - the accumulation of nodal processing delay, queuing delay, transmission delay, and propagation delay.

traffic intensity - The ratio La/R. Where 'a' is in units of packets/sec. L in bits and R in bits/sec.

packet drop - results when a router has no place to store a packet.

packet loss - when packet drop occurs, the packet is lost.

traceroute -  a simple program that can run in any Internet host. When the user specifies a
destination hostname, the program in the source host sends multiple, special packets toward that
destination. As these packets work their way toward the destination, they pass through a series of
routers. When a router receives one of these special packets, it sends back to the source a short
message that contains the name and address of the router.

instantaneous throughput - the rate (in bits/sec) at which a Host is receiving the file. 

average throughput - F/T bits/sec where F is the amount of bits in a file and T is how many seconds it takes for a Host to receive all
F bits.

bottleneck link - a link that is fully used and of all the flows sharing the link, the given data flow achieves maximum data rate network-
wide. 

layered architecture - an architecture in which data moves from one defined level of processing to another. allows us to discuss a 
well-defined, specific part of a large and complex system.

service model - the services that a layer offers to the layer above.

internet protocol stack - consists of five layers: the physical, link, network, transport, and application layers.

ISO OSI protocol stack - Open Systems Interconnection.  application layer, presentation layer, session layer, transport layer, 
network layer, data link layer, and physical layer.

application-layer message - a message sent from the application layer to the transport layer.

transport-layer segment - encapsulates the application-layer message.  

network-layer datagram - The transport layer then passes the segment to the network layer, which adds network-layer header information 
such as source and destination end system addresses.

link-layer frame - The datagram is then passed to the link layer, which (of course!) will add its own link-layer header information and 
create a link-layer frame.

payload field - a packet from the layer above.